Scientists have added another dinosaur species to the prehistoric catalog, and this one was found in present-day Utah.

Researchers working in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument discovered the new species of dinosaur— a large, horned, herbivorous creature that could have been anywhere from 19 to 26 feet long and weighed in at one to two tons. It took them three field seasons to excavate the fossils.

The dinosaur, named Machairoceratops cronusi, is thought to have lived about 77 million years ago. It’s uncommon for a dinosaur of this type to be discovered in this region of the United States, as usually their fossils are found in places like Alaska and Montana.

“Even in a place like western North America, where intense work has been conducted over the past 150 years, we are still finding species new to science," Patrick O’Connor, a coauthor on the study reporting the find, said in a statement.

Related: Fearsome dinosaur-age 'hammerhead' reptile ate … plants?

This dinosaur dwelled during the Cretaceous Period in a part of North America that scientists call Laramidia, which was to the west of a sea that divided the continent. This new discovery, found in southern Laramidia, is different from dinosaurs from the same group found in the northern part of Laramidia, suggesting that these dinosaurs lived in two different regions and thus comprised two sub-groups that were shaped differently by evolution.

Dinosaurs in this group, called Centrosaurine ceratopsids, had horns, beaks, and neck shields.

“Machairoceratops is unique in possessing two large, forward curving spikes off of the back of the neck shield, each of which is marked by a peculiar groove extending from the base of the spike to the tip, the function of which is currently unknown,” Erik Lund, one of the researchers involved in the discovery, said in a statement.

Related: Dinosaur decline started long before asteroid impact

Lund is the lead author of the study, which was published today in the journal PLOS ONE.

Despite its rows and rows of chisel- and needle-like teeth, a newly described prehistoric marine reptile wasn't a fearsome predator but rather an herbivorous giant that acted like a lawnmower for the sea, a new study finds.

The crocodile-size reptile lived about 242 million years ago, during the Middle Triassic period. Researchers discovered the first specimen in 2014 in southern China, but because it was poorly preserved, they reported that it had a beak like a flamingo's.

Now, two newly discovered specimens show that the beast was far more bizarre: It sported a hammerhead-shaped snout that it likely used to graze on plants lining the ocean floor, the researchers said. It's also the earliest herbivorous marine reptile on record by about 8 million years, they said.
"I haven't seen anything like it before," said study co-researcher Olivier Rieppel, the Rowe family curator of evolutionary biology at The Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago.

Weird reptile
The reptile's name — Atopodentatus unicus — hints at its weird anatomy. In Latin, the genus and species names translate to "unique strangely toothed," the researchers said. The newly analyzed specimens show that the creature had a mouthful of chisel-shaped teeth — one row on the upper jaw and two rows on the lower jaw.

"The remaining parts of the jaw [are filled with] densely packed needle-shaped teeth forming a mesh," the researchers wrote in the study, published online May 6 in the journal Science Advances. This mesh likely helped A. unicus collect plant material, much like a baleen whale catches krill, said Louis Jacobs, a vertebrate paleontologist at Southern Methodist University in Texas who was not involved in the study.

The chisel-like teeth probably acted as a rake and trimmer, helping A. unicus scrape and dislodge plants from the seafloor, Jacobs said. Next, the reptile likely sucked in a mouthful of water, letting bits of plants get stuck in the mesh formed by its thin, needle-like teeth, he said.

"Then, they squish the water out of their mouth, and those little teeth along the sides of the jaw and on the roof of the mouth strain out all of the plant bits," Jacobs told Live Science. "That's an amazing way to feed. I'd like to do that myself."

Rare beast
The two new specimens are teaching scientists about herbivorous marine reptiles, which are rare even today. One of the few modern herbivorous marine reptiles includes the marine iguana of the Galapagos, which swims around, plucking algae off of marine rocks for food, Jacobs said.

There are also a few herbivorous marine mammals, such as manatees and dugongs, and the extinct marine mammals known as the Desmostylians (which Jacobs helped describe in a 2015 study published in the journal Historical Biology.) But, in general, marine reptiles are omnivores or carnivores, such as most modern sea turtles and the extinct marine predators, the ichthyosaurs and plesiosaurs.

"[A. unicus] is so surprising because it is very rare, that anything besides fish living in water would be herbivorous," Jacobs told Live Science.

A. unicus also tells researchers about how life recovered after the Permian-Triassic mass extinction about 252 million years ago.

"The existence of specialized animals like Atopodentatus unicus shows us that life recovered and diversified more quickly than previously thought," Rieppel said in a statement. "And it's definitely a reptile that no one would have thought to exist. Look at it — it's crazy!"

In the latest chapter of clues left by dinosaurs, it turns out that they migrated out of Europe en masse some 100 million years ago.
New information published in the Journal of Biogeography Tuesday reveals that during the Early Cretaceous period, dinosaur families left significant information about their departure from certain parts of Europe; indicating that while many families left the territory, none entered it.

Researchers from Department of Biology & Biochemistry at the University of Bath and the University of Leeds in the U.K. undertook the project. They determined this information using a method known as “network theory,” which is often used in physics, or to quantify internet data, like one’s friends on Facebook.

Related: Dinosaur decline started long before asteroid impact

In order to solidify their findings, the researchers turned to the Paleogeology Database, a catalog containing every documented and accessible fossil across the globe. Records from different dinosaur families in different parts of the world were then mapped, and a filter was applied to only count family connections between different continents once.

The information further reveals that dinosaurs continued to migrate to other territories using temporary land bridges following the split of the subcontinent Pangea.

Related: Scientists discover cousin of T. Rex in Uzbekistan desert

On the University of Bath website, Dr. Alex Dunhill from the University of Leeds said, “We presume that temporary land bridges formed due to changes in sea levels, temporarily reconnecting the continents.”

The dinosaurs — the so-called tyrants of the Mesozoic era — weren't exactly thriving during their last few million years on Earth, a new study finds.

The new analysis of the dinosaur family tree reveals that dinosaurs were disappearing even before the asteroid hit about 65.5 million years ago. Roughly 24 million years before that impact, dinosaur extinction rates passed speciation rates, meaning that the animals were losing the ability to replace extinct species with new ones, the researchers said.

The findings suggest that these striking extinction rates made the dinosaurs vulnerable to drastic environmental changes, such as the asteroid collision, the researchers said. [Wipe Out: History's Most Mysterious Extinctions]

"This implies that any group of animals that is under prolonged periods of high extinction rate can undergo mass extinction should there be a catastrophic event," said study lead researcher Manabu Sakamoto, a postdoctoral research assistant of biological sciences at the University of Reading in the United Kingdom.

The study isn't the first to suggest that dinosaurs were in a major decline before the asteroid event. In previous studies, scientists have recorded the number of species in each geological age and compared those levels to the subsequent ages (each age lasts for millions of years) to get a sense of how diverse the dinosaurs were, Sakamoto said.

But that method focuses on snapshots in time and doesn't take into account the extinction and speciation rate within each branch of the dinosaur family tree. So the researchers of the new study looked at the dinosaur fossil record and the family tree to get a robust picture of when new dinosaur species came onto the scene, Sakamoto said.

"Our study is the first to incorporate such phylogenetic [family tree] information when studying speciation and extinction in dinosaurs," Sakamoto told Live Science. "This is what has allowed us to build a more nuanced and certain picture of dinosaur speciation than has ever before been possible."

Dinosaur detectives

The researchers separately analyzed the three major groups of dinosaurs: the ornithischians (such as Stegosaurus), sauropodomorphs (the long-necked, long-tailed herbivores) and theropods (bipedal, mostly carnivorous dinosaurs, such as T. rex and Albertosaurus).

The sauropodomorphs had the most prominent downturn, the scientists found. The research showed spikes in new species of this type of dinosaur emerging during the Triassic and early Jurassic periods, until about 195 million years ago, when that speciation rate began to slow down. At 114 million years ago, during the early Cretaceous period, species of sauropodomorphs were going extinct faster than new species were emerging, the researchers found.

"The subsequent originations of [the] titanosaurian [group] were not nearly enough to compensate for the continuous loss of sauropods throughout the remainder of the Cretaceous," the scientists wrote in the study.

Theropods had an "early burst" of speciation followed by a speciation slowdown from the late Triassic to the early Cretaceous (about 215 million years ago to about 120 million years ago), when extinction rate exceeded speciation rate, the researchers found.

Likewise, ornithischians show an early increase followed by a speciation slowdown at about 114 million years ago, when extinction rate surpassed speciation rate. But there were a few success stories within this group. The hadrosauriforms (duck-billed dinosaurs) and ceratopsids (the horned dinosaurs, such as Triceratops) did well, likely because they had developed jaws that helped them munch on new food, possibly flowering plants, the researchers said. [Dinosaur Detective: Find Out What You Really Know]

When the researchers considered the three dinosaur groups separately, "We found unequivocal evidence that dinosaurs were in decline up to 50 million years prior to the mass extinction event 66 million years ago," Sakamoto said.

Extinction lessons

It's unclear why the dinosaurs started going extinct so early, but there are clues as to why speciation increased during certain periods, the scientists said. One idea is that rising sea levels cut into the land, fragmenting dinosaur habitats and nudging the beasts to evolve separately into new species in different areas, the researchers said.

However, after dinosaur extinction rates began to rise, another group of animals started thriving: mammals.

"The decline of the dinosaurs would have left plenty of room for mammals, the group of species which humans are a member of, to flourish before the impact, priming them to replace dinosaurs as the dominant animals on Earth [after the impact]," study co-author Chris Venditti, an evolutionary biologist at the University of Reading, said in a statement.

The new findings may help scientists understand the possible consequences of today's extinctions, the researchers added.

"We live in a time when species are undergoing unprecedented levels of extinctions," Sakamoto told Live Science. "This means that if some major catastrophe hits, then it is highly possible that whole groups of animals [will] be completely wiped out off the face of the Earth."

The study is an interesting one, said Alan Turner, an associate professor of anatomical sciences at Stony Brook School of Medicine in New York, who was not involved in the research.

"Through modeling of speciation dynamics, it appears that dinosaur diversity was declining well in advance of the end-Cretaceous extinction event that killed off all nonavian dinosaurs, as well as numerous other vertebrate groups," Turner told Live Science in an email.

The study was published online April 18 in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

A team of scientists at Indiana University, Bloomington, looked to the skies and discovered a blue “dwarf galaxy” in Leo Minor containing the lowest level of metals ever observed in a celestial body. The finding also provides new information about the Big Bang.

Officially, the galaxy is named AGC 198691, but its friends call it “Leoncino,” or “Little Lion,” in honor of its constellation location and Italian-born radio astronomer, Riccardo Giovanelli, who led the group that identified the galaxy.

Related: Alien megastructure? Dimming star may have less exotic explanation

Leoncino is located 30 million light years from Earth. The galaxy has an estimated 29 percent less metal abundance than another galaxy identified in 2005, which was previously thought to be the lowest metal galaxy.

The team wrote on its website that low-metal galaxies contain properties that are similar to those present at the start of the universe.

The currently accepted theory about how the universe began provides, “clear predictions about the amount of helium and hydrogen present during the Big Bang, and the ratio of these atoms in metal-poor galaxies provides a direct test of the model,” wrote the team.

Professor John J. Salzer, an author on the study, said, "Finding the most metal-poor galaxy ever is exciting since it could help contribute to a quantitative test of the Big Bang. There are relatively few ways to explore conditions at the birth of the universe, but low-metal galaxies are among the most promising."

Related: Three million photos and counting: Space station crew takes milestone snapshots

Scientists estimate elements in a galaxy using spectroscopic observations to capture light waves that the systems emit. Astronomers are able to view the light in a manner similar to the rainbow created by a prism, according to the website.

Salzer said the team will continue to study the galaxy using other telescopes, including the Hubble Space Telescope. "Low-metal-abundance galaxies are extremely rare, so we want to learn everything we can."

A mysterious darkening star might not be home to an alien megastructure after all. Instead, the dimming that apparently occurred over the course of a century may actually have resulted from how telescopes and cameras have changed over time, researchers said.

Last fall, a star named KIC 8462852 made news when scientists found unusual fluctuations in the object's light. The star is an otherwise-ordinary F-type star, slightly larger and hotter than Earth's sun; it sits about 1,480 light-years away from Earth in the constellation Cygnus.

But astronomer Tabetha "Tabby" Boyajian of Yale University in Connecticut and her colleagues, along with citizen scientists from the Planet Hunters crowdsourcing program, found something odd. They discovered dozens of strange instances of the star darkening over a 100-day period when they analyzed data from NASA's Kepler Space Telescope.

The dimming events blocked up to 22 percent of the light from KIC 8462852, now nicknamed "Tabby's Star," making these events far too substantial to be caused by planets crossing (or "transiting") the star's face. Scientists also ruled out several other possible explanations, such as an enormous dust cloud.

Such analyses raised the possibility that astronomers had detected signs of alien life — specifically, a Dyson sphere, a megastructure built around a star to capture as much of the sun's energy as possible to power an advanced civilization. (In science fiction, Dyson spheres — which are named after mathematician and physicist Freeman Dyson — are often depicted as solid shells around stars, but they could also be spherical swarms of giant solar panels.)

So far, astronomers at the SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) Institutein California analyzing Tabby's Starwith the Allen Telescope Array have not detected any radio signals that would indicate the presence of an alien civilization. Scientists at SETI International in San Francisco and their colleagues have also failed to detect any laser signals from Tabby's Star.

Still, in January, astronomer Bradley Schaefer of Louisiana State University reviewed archived photographic plates of the sky taken from 1890 to 1989 and found signs that Tabby's Star had dimmed by about 20 percent over the past century. He noted that this finding was difficult to explain by natural means. For instance, Schaefer calculated that it would require 648,000 comets, each about 125 miles wide, passing by the star in the past century to cause such dimming.

Now, however, researchers suggest this seemingly century-long dimming trend might not be real. Instead, the apparent darkening may just be due to how astronomical instruments have changed over time.

In the new study, scientists pored over DASCH (Digital Access to a Sky Century @ Harvard) data. This is a collection of more than 500,000 photographic glass plates taken by astronomers at Harvard in Massachusetts between 1885 and 1993 that the university is digitizing.

"It is exciting that we have these century-old data, which are incredibly valuable for checks like this," study lead author Michael Hippke, an amateur astronomer from the German town of Neukirchen-Vluyn, told Space.com.

The researchers looked not only at Tabby's Star, but also at a number of comparable stars in the DASCH database. Results showed that many of these other stars experienced a drop in brightness similar to that of Tabby's Star in the 1960s.

"That indicates the drops were caused by changes in the instrumentation, not by changes in the stars' brightness," study co-author Keivan Stassun at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee, said in a statement.

"Now, what does that mean for the mystery? Are there no aliens after all? Probably not," Hippke said in an email. "Still, the daylong dips found by Kepler are real. Something seems to be transiting in front of this star, and we still have no idea what it is."

The best explanation so far for this dimming may be that a giant comet fragmented into thousands of smaller comets that are now crossing in front of Tabby's Star, some scientists say. To help solve this celestial mystery, amateur astronomers around the world are working with the American Association of Variable Star Observers to find new dips in the star's brightness, Hippke noted. Other groups, such as the Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope, have also joined the effort, he said.

"Observing further dips in different colors can reveal information about the chemistry of the transiting object, which might confirm or reject a cometary origin," Hippke said.

Tens of thousands of Australians turned out to gawk as the world’s largest plane descended into Perth’s airport on Sunday. The hulking Antonov An-225 cargo plane, which boasts six engines and wings that measure almost 300 feet long, was delivering a 100-plus-ton generator for a refinery. It landed smoothly with puffs of smoke from its many wheels.

It was an unusual aviation event, marking the first time the plane landed in Australia, and the moment spurred huge traffic delays around the airport as people came out to glimpse the enormous airplane, according to local media.

Related: Mystery Mission: Air Force's X-37B space plane nears 1 year in orbit

The plane, which measures about 275 feet long and is known for its ability to carry huge cargo loads, touched down under partly cloudy skies, and was greeted with sprays of water.

“It’s very rare to get something like this coming here,” David Eyre, president of the Aviation Association in Western Australia, said, according to 9news.com.au. The aircraft has a split tail and the nose can flip up for loading and unloading cargo.

On Twitter, the Perth airport wished the massive white, yellow, and blue plane a safe voyage out of Australia, writing: “It's been a pleasure #AN225 Mriya! Safe travels home tomorrow.”

The nano age and space age have converged in a partnership that could usher in a new era of hope for cancer patients.

Like the advent of modern anesthesia and its impact on surgical research in the 19th century, a major research project aboard the International Space Station for the newly-created Houston Methodist Center of Space NanoMedicine could deliver major results.

“We are on the verge of something big,” Alessandro Grattoni, director of the Houston Methodist Center of Space Nanomedicine, told FoxNews.com. “It could change the way chemotherapy is delivered.”

A concept developed by Grattoni involves a reloadable implant, inserted under the skin, which is trained to attack tumors and ferret out hidden metastasized cells. The first experiment launched on Space X-8 last month and is expected to shed light on the mysterious way particles diffuse as they move through tight nanospaces. Grattoni’s team, working with particles 50,000 times smaller than the human hair, have previously only viewed their work via computer modeling.

Related: NASA identifies 1,284 new exoplanets, most ever announced at once

“Part of our frustration has been working on this for 10 years, never being able to see it, that’s why it was important to create a larger scale,” he told FoxNews.com.

The project is studying the diffusion of drug molecules through nanochannels encased in DVD-sized panels, enabling scientists to view the movement of the 2.8-micrometer particles without gravity’s tug.

Micro-gravity provides scientists with 3-D viewing of cell behavior. Fluorescent microscopes on the ISS are sending real-time images to NASA’s Glenn Research Center and Grattoni and his team are seeing the fruits of their work for the first time.

“Space is accelerating our research,” said Grattoni. “It’s exciting knowing it’s actually going to be used by someone rather than just being a benchmark.” Austin-based NanoMedical Systems has the license on the invention.

Related: Lockheed Martin makes major STEM push to inspire young space innovators

Since 1998, the ISS has facilitated projects by over 2,400 researchers from 83 countries. However, the new device, paired with the work of nanotechnology pioneer, Mauro Ferrari, offers a particularly bright beacon in a potential new age of nanotheraputics.

Ferrari’s landmark preclinical study cured lung metastases in 50 percent of breast cancers by creating the first drug to successfully eliminate lung metastases in mice.  That’s equivalent to about 24 years of long-term survival following metastatic disease in humans, according to the nanotechnologist. The majority of cancer deaths are due to metastases to the lung and liver.

“This may sound like science fiction, like we’ve penetrated and destroyed the Death Star, but what we discovered is transformational,” Ferrari, president and CEO of the Houston Methodist Research Institute, told FoxNews.com. “We’re talking about changing the landscape of curing metastatic disease, so it’s no longer a death sentence.”

Due to the body’s own defense mechanism, most cancer drugs are absorbed into healthy tissue, causing negative side effects with only a fraction of the medicine actually reaching the tumor, making it less effective, according to Ferrari. Like the moon launches during the Apollo program, he says the new strategy enables sequential passage of these natural barriers to transport a lethal payload into the cancer’s core.

Related: Buzz Aldrin eyes 2040 for manned Mars mission

Since publication of his results in Nature Biotechnology earlier this year, Ferrari says governments and over 2,000 people suffering with the disease have reached out to his team to participate in a clinical study that could begin next year.

Julie Robinson, chief scientist for the ISS, also cites the specialized needles and capsules developed by Virginia-based NuVue Therapeutics to mark tumors as a promising breakthrough.

“A new cancer drug can take as long as 30 to 40 years,” she told FoxNews.com. “This is exciting because it doesn’t include pharmaceuticals.”

The original research, begun during the STS-95 space shuttle mission in 1998, has developed into a microencapsulation process in which a biodegradable micro-balloon delivers anti-tumor drugs in doses smaller than the pinhead of a needle. Researchers discovered that the specialized needles could also be used to deliver marking agents for enhanced ultrasound visualization during biopsies. Investigators hope to bring the products to market within three to five years.

Ferrari likens the partnership between science and space to President John F. Kennedy’s call for exploration. “If we can truly cure the nastiest of cancers, we have the responsibility to do so not because it’s easy but because it’s hard,” he said. “If we do, I’m confident the generation of my children will see an end to cancer deaths.”

The Swiss-made Solar Impulse 2 took off from Phoenix Goodyear Airport about 3 a.m. Thursday. It landed without incident at Tulsa International Airport around 11:15 p.m., the Tulsa World reported.

It departed from northern California in the early hours of May 2 and landed at the airport southwest of Phoenix 16 hours later. Last month, it flew from Hawaii to California.

The globe-circling voyage began in March 2015 from Abu Dhabi, the capital of the United Arab Emirates, and made stops in Oman, Myanmar, China and Japan.

After Oklahoma, the plane is expected to make at least one more stop in the United States before crossing the Atlantic Ocean to Europe or northern Africa, according to the website documenting the journey.

The newspaper reported the crew likely will have to stay in Tulsa a few days to wait out the weather.

The Solar Impulse 2's wings, which stretch wider than those of a Boeing 747, are equipped with 17,000 solar cells that power propellers and charge batteries. The plane runs on stored energy at night.

Ideal flight speed is about 28 mph, although that can double during the day when the sun's rays are strongest.

The plane had a five-day trip from Japan to Hawaii and three-day trip from Hawaii to California's Silicon Valley.

The crew was forced to stay in Oahu, Hawaii, for nine months after the plane's battery system sustained heat damage on its trip from Japan.

Project officials say the layovers give the two Swiss pilots — Bertrand Piccard and Andre Borschberg — a chance to swap places and engage with local communities along the way so they can explain the project, which is estimated to cost more than $100 million.

The solar project began in 2002 to highlight the importance of renewable energy and the spirit of innovation.
