As the UN decides to govern the Avengers due to the deaths and the destruction caused on their missions, they are split down the middle.
Team Captain America and Team Iron Man must fight for what, and who they believe in - while also fighting each other.
When friends become enemies, enemies become friends, new faces and cracks appear in the hero supergroup, it begs the question - ‘Who, and what will survive?’
There were definitely some stand-out performances in the film.
Both Chris Evans and Sebastian Stan reprise their roles as Captain America/Steve Rogers, and The Winter Soldier/Bucky Barnes respectively,
and both carry many of the particularly emotive parts of the film as they attempt to rekindle their characters friendship.
Both actors were superb - whether in a scene together or individually, both actors work mean that the film has some incredibly emotional moments like those found in the ‘The Winter Soldier’.
Bucky Barnes will also quickly become a favourite character if he isn't already, as Stan plays and develops him with impressive depth.
The only disappointment is the fact that Cap himself seems to get less screentime than I first anticipated, given that his name is in the actual title of the film itself.
It would have been nice to see more of Evans and Stan bouncing off of each other as they do so incredibly well,
and if you are looking for a continuation of ‘The Winter Soldier’, in terms of developing and establishing Barnes and Rogers friendship,
at times it can sadly take a back seat in the film.
However, the lack of screentime for Team Cap does allow some members of Team Iron Man to shine,
with Robert Downey Jr giving a fantastic performance as Tony Stark/Iron Man that allows an audience to see the character's rare emotional side.
He too, works extremely well with Evans (and later, Stan) as they all make the last 25 minutes of the film particularly emotional and harrowing,
allowing the film to finish on an extreme high.
Scarlett Johansson also continues to flesh out Black Widow with grace and style,
and the two newcomers to the Marvel universe and screen - Chadwick Boseman as T’Challa/Black Panther
and Tom Holland as Peter Parker/Spiderman are outstanding in their roles,
leaving you on the edge of your seat and desperate to see both character's standalone films.
